---
title: 'Smart Eye'
date: 2021-12-01
permalink: /posts/2021/12/01/smart-eye/
tags:
  - Statistics
---

The Smart Eye Pro system is a head and gaze tracking system, which measures the subject's __head pose__ and __gaze direction__ in 3D. In addition, information about __eye lid opening__ values and __pupil dilation__ can be measured.

## Setup Wizard
To start the tracking, the following tasks need to be performed:
1. Assemble the system. Place the camera(s) in a fix and stable position to avoid movement during tracking. Make sure all cables are connected.
2. Perform a "Camera Calibration" (F3).
3. Define the "World Coordinate System (WCS)" (CTRL+D).
4. Start "Tracking" by pressing or selecting "Tracking Start " in the "Action" menu (F2).
5. Perform a "Gaze Calibration" (CTRL+G).
6. Verify that the system operates correctly by opening a "Values View" in the "Window" menu (SHIFT+V).
7. Data can be sent to one or more client applications specified in the _Settings->Logging..._ tab (ALT+F8).
8. Save the automatically created profile by pressing _Action->Tracking->Stop_, followed by pressing _Profile->Save_.

## Before Setting Up
Before __Camera Caliberation__, it is important to check the aperture and focus settings on the camera. Since the aperture has influence on the focus, it is recommended to __first__ adjust the __aperture__ and __then__ the __focus__

### Adjusting Aperture
The brightness is adjusted for one camera after the other. The subject should look towards the active camera so that its face is visible in the center. 

A gray value histogram is shown above the camera image. Ideally the gray value histogram includes the full spectrum from low (left) to high (right) gray values. __The optimal aperture setting is reached when the red bar on the left side of the box reaches its maximum__. It does not necessarily need to reach the top. The achievable maximum can be found by moving the aperture further until the bar decreases again and then back to the maximum.

### Adjusting Focus
The focus is adjusted for one camera after the other. The subject should look towards the active camera so that its face is visible in the center. 

the yellow bar on the right side  the window indicates the quality of the focus setting. The optimal setting is reached when the yellow bar on the right side of the box reaches its maximum. It does not necessarily need to reach the top. The achievable maximum can be found by moving the focus further until the bar again and then back to the maximum.

## Camera Caliberation


## World Coordinate System

## Tracking

## Gaze Caliberation

## Viewing

## Data Logging

## Stopping and Saving
