---
title: 'Data Cleaning [03]: String Manipulation'
date: 2021-02-06
permalink: /posts/2021/02/06/string-manipulation/
tags:
  - Data Cleaning
  - String Manipulation
  - Regular Expression
---

Simple strings can be operated with string built-in methods. For more complex patterns, regular expression is a powerful tool.

---
## String Built-In Methods
- `count()`
- `endwith()`, `startwith()`
- `index()`, `find()`, `rfind()`
- `replace()`
- `strip()`, `rstrip()`, `lstrip()`
- `split()`
- `lower()`
- `upper()`
- `casefold()`: stronger version of `lower()`
- `rjust()`, `ljust()`

---
## Regular Expressions

### Special Characters
- `.`: In the default mode, this matches any character except a newline.
- `^`: Matches the start of the string.
- `$`: Matches the end of the string or just before the newline at the end of the string.
- `*`: Causes the resulting RE to match 0 or more repetitions of the preceding RE
- `+`: Causes the resulting RE to match 1 or more repetitions of the preceding RE.
- `?`: Causes the resulting RE to match 0 or 1 repetitions of the preceding RE.
- `*?`,`+?`, `??`: greedy -> non-greedy
  - ```re.search('<.*>', '<a> b <c>')  -> <re.Match object; span=(0, 9), match='<a> b <c>'>```
  - ```re.search('<.*?>', '<a> b <c>') -> <re.Match object; span=(0, 3), match='<a>'>```
- `{m}`: Specifies that exactly m copies of the previous RE should be matched
- `{m,n}`: Causes the resulting RE to match from m to n repetitions of the preceding RE, attempting to match as **many** repetitions as possible. Omitting `m` specifies a lower bound of zero, and omitting `n` specifies an infinite upper bound. 
- `{m,n}?`: Causes the resulting RE to match from m to n repetitions of the preceding RE, attempting to match as **few** repetitions as possible.
- `[]`: Used to indicate a set of characters.
  - Characters can be listed individually, e.g. `[abc]` will match `a`, `b` or `c`.
  - Ranges of characters can be indicated by giving two characters and separating them by a `-`.
  - Special characters lose their special meaning inside sets.
  - If the **first** character of the set is `^`, all the characters that are not in the set will be matched.
  - To match a literal `]` inside a set, precede it with a backslash `\`, or place it at the beginning of the set.
- `|`: `A|B` creates a regular expression that will match either A or B. 
- `(...)`: Matches whatever regular expression is inside the parentheses, and indicates the start and end of a **group**.
- `(?...)`: The first character after the `?` determines what the meaning and further syntax of the construct is.
  - `(?aiLmsux)`: One or more letters from the set `a`, `i`, `L`, `m`, `s`, `u`, `x`. 
    - re.A (ASCII-only matching)
    - re.I (ignore case) 
    - re.L (locale dependent)
    - re.M (multi-line)
    - re.S (dot matches all) 
    - re.U (Unicode matching)
    - re.X (verbose) 
  - `(?:...)`: A non-capturing version of regular parentheses.
  - `(?aiLmsux-imsx:...)`: Zero or more letters from the set `a`, `i`, `L`, `m`, `s`, `u`, `x`, optionally followed by `-` followed by one or more letters from the `i`, `m`, `s`, `x`.
  - `(?P<name>...)`: Add label that can be referenced to the group. 
  - `(?P=name)`: A backreference to a named group.
  - `(?#...)`: A comment; the contents of the parentheses are simply ignored.
  - `(?=...)`: Matches if `...` matches next.
  - `(?!...)`: Matches if `...` __doesn't__ match next.
  - `(?<=...)`: Matches if the current position in the string is preceded by a match for `...` that ends at the current position.
  - `(?<!...)`: Matches if the current position in the string is not preceded by a match for `...`.
  - `(?(id/name)yes-pattern|no-pattern)`: Will try to match with `yes-pattern` if the group with given **id** or **name** **exists**, and with `no-pattern` if it **doesn't**.
    - `(<)?(\w+@\w+(?:\.\w+)+)(?(1)>|$)` will match `<user@host.com>` or `user@host.com`. 
- `\`: Either escapes special characters, or signals a special sequence.
  - `\number`: Matches the contents of the group of the same number. Groups are numbered starting from 1. 
  - `\A`: Matches only at the start of the string.
  - `\b`: Matches the empty string, but only at the beginning or end of a word.
  - `\B`: Matches the empty string, but only when it is **not** at the beginning or end of a word. 
  - `\d`: Matches any Unicode decimal digit, equivalent to `[0-9]`.
  - `\D`: Matches any character which is not a decimal digit, equivalent to `[^0-9]`. 
  - `\s`: Matches Unicode whitespace characters, equivalent to `[ \t\n\r\f\v]`.
  - `\S`: Matches any character which is not a whitespace character, equivalent to `[^ \t\n\r\f\v]`.
  - `\w`: Matches Unicode word characters, equivalent to `[a-zA-Z0-9_]`.
  - `\W`: Matches any character which is not a word character, equivalent to `[^a-zA-Z0-9_]`.
  - `\Z`: Matches only at the end of the string. 

### Pattern Matching

__match()__

```python
re.match(pattern, string, flags=0)
```
If zero or more characters at the **beginning** of string match the regular expression pattern, return a corresponding match object. 

```python
re.fullmatch(pattern, string, flags=0)
```
If the whole string matches the regular expression pattern, return a corresponding match object. 

```python
re.match(r'dog', 'doggie')
Out[245]: <re.Match object; span=(0, 3), match='dog'>

re.fullmatch(r'dog', 'doggie')
# Return None
```
__search()__

```python
re.search(pattern, string, flags=0)
```
Scan through string looking for the first location where the regular expression pattern produces a match, and return a corresponding match object.


__find()__

```python
re.findall(pattern, string, flags=0)
```
Return all non-overlapping matches of pattern in string, as a list of strings or tuples.

The result depends on the number of capturing groups in the pattern. If there are no groups, return a list of strings matching the whole pattern. If there is exactly one group, return a list of strings matching that group. If multiple groups are present, return a list of tuples of strings matching the groups.

```python
re.findall(r'\bf[a-z]*', 'which foot or hand fell fastest')
Out[240]: ['foot', 'fell', 'fastest']

re.findall(r'(\w+)=(\d+)', 'set width=20 and height=10')
Out[241]: [('width', '20'), ('height', '10')]
```

```python
re.finditer(pattern, string, flags=0)
```
Return an iterator yielding match objects over all non-overlapping matches for the RE pattern in string. 

### Substitution
```python
re.sub(pattern, repl, string, count=0, flags=0)¶
```
Return the string obtained by replacing the leftmost non-overlapping occurrences of pattern in string by the replacement repl. 

`repl` can be a string or a function; if it is a string, any backslash escapes in it are processed. That is, `\n` is converted to a single newline character, `\r` is converted to a carriage return, and so forth. Unknown escapes of ASCII letters are reserved for future use and treated as errors. Other unknown escapes such as `\&` are left alone. Backreferences, such as `\6`, are replaced with the substring matched by group 6 in the pattern. 

```python
re.sub(r'\sAND\s', ' & ', 'Baked Beans And Spam', flags=re.IGNORECASE)
Out[250]: 'Baked Beans & Spam'

re.sub(r'def\s+([a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z_0-9]*)\s*\(\s*\):', 
       r'static PyObject*\npy_\1(void)\n{', # \1 would be 'myfunc'
       'def myfunc():')
Out[247]: 'static PyObject*\npy_myfunc(void)\n{'
```

If repl is a function, it is called for every non-overlapping occurrence of pattern. The function takes a single match object argument, and returns the replacement string. For example:
```python
def dashrepl(matchobj):
  if matchobj.group(0) == '-': return ' '
  else: return '-'
   
re.sub('-{1,2}', dashrepl, 'pro----gram-files')
Out[249]: 'pro--gram files'
```

```python
re.subn(pattern, repl, string, count=0, flags=0)
```
Perform the same operation as sub(), but return a tuple `(new_string, number_of_subs_made)`.

### Splitting
```python
re.split(pattern, string, maxsplit=0, flags=0)
```
Split string by the occurrences of pattern. If capturing parentheses are used in pattern, then the text of all groups in the pattern are also returned as part of the resulting list.
```python
re.split(r'\W+', 'Words, words, words.')
Out[236]: ['Words', 'words', 'words', '']

re.split(r'(\W+)', 'Words, words, words.')
Out[237]: ['Words', ', ', 'words', ', ', 'words', '.', '']

re.split('\s+', "foo bar\t baz \tqux")
Out[239]: ['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'qux']
```

