---
title: 'C++ Basics [06]: Functions Overloading and Matching'
date: 2022-01-12
permalink: /posts/2022/01/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - C++
---

Functions that have the __same name__ but __different parameter lists__ and that appear in the __same scope__ are overloaded. When we call these functions, the compiler can deduce which function we want based on the argument type we pass. Here arise a question: when does two parameter lists differ? 

---
## Defining Overloaded Functions
Here is an example given in C++ primier. Although it looks like the parameter types are different in the following two pairs, each pair actually defines the same function.
```cpp
Record lookup(const Account& acct);
Record lookup(const Account&);    // parameter names are ignored

typedef Phone Telno;
Record lookup(const Phone&);
Record lookup(const Telno&);      // Telno and Phone are the same type
```

In can be more trickier with `const` parameters. Parameters defiend as __references/pointers to const__ and __const pointers__ can behave very differently. When parameters are defined as __const pointers__, as the `const` declaration only declares the pointers to be const, the arguments passed to the function can still only be nonconstant, which is the same as __plain pointers__. In this way, the conpiler cannot distinguish which function to call according to the parameter lists. Therefore, the second declaration in the following example would be a mistake.   
```cpp
Record lookup(Phone*);
Record lookup(Phone* const);  // redeclares Record lookup(Phone*)
```

When parameters are defined as __references to const__ or __pointers to const__, as the objects they referece/point to are constants, the compiler can use the constness of the argument to distinguish which function to call. Therefore, the following two pairs of functions would be different declarations.
```cpp
Record lookup(Account&);        // function that takes a reference to Account
Record lookup(const Account&);  // new function that takes a reference to const

Record lookup(Account*);        // new function, takes a pointer to Account
Record lookup(const Account*);  // new function, takes a pointer to const
```

> Note: Because there is __no conversion from const__, we can pass a const object (or a pointer to const) only to the version with a const parameter. Because __there is a conversion to const__, we can call either function on a nonconst object or a pointer to nonconst.
```cpp
int i = 0;
const int j = 1;
int* const ptr1 = &i;       // ok
int* const ptr2 = &j;       // error: invalid conversion from 'const int*' to 'int*'
const int* ptr3 = &i;       // ok
const int* ptr4 = &j;       // ok
const int* const ptr5 = &i; // ok
const int* const ptr6 = &j; // ok
```
---
## Calling Overloaded Functions
In many cases, it might be straightforward to determine whether a particular call is illegal and which function will be called. However, Determining which function is called when the overloaded
functions have the same number of parameters and those parameters are related by conversions can be less obvious. As an example, consider the following set of functions and function call with a single argument:
```cpp
void f();
void f(int);
void f(int, int);
void f(double, double = 3.14);
f(5.6);
```
The following steps will be involved to match the overloaded functions:
1. Identify the set of overloaded functions considered for the call. In this case, there are 4 candidate functions named `f`.
2. Select from the set of candidate functions that can be called with the arguments in the given call. As with any call, an argument might match its parameter either because the types match exactly or because there is a conversion from the argument type to the type of the parameter. In this case, there are two viable functions, `f(int)` and `f(double, double = 3.4)`.
3. Find the best match, if any. The idea is that the closer the types of the argument and parameter are to each other, the better the match.In this case, it is `f(double, double = 3.4)`.

It can be more complicated when there are two and more arguments. Consider the following call with two arguments.
```cpp
f(5, 5.6)
```
If we look at the first argument, `f(int, int)` would be the best match; however, if we look at the second argument, `f(double, double)` would be the best match. The compilerwill reject this call because it is ambiguous: Each viable function is a bettermatch than the other on one of the arguments to the call.
> Casts should not be needed to call an overloaded function. The need for a cast suggests that the parameter sets are designed poorly.

---

