---
title: 'Data Types [01]: Python Built-In Types'
date: 2022-02-01
permalink: /posts/2022/02/01/python-data-types/
tags:
  - Python
  - Data Types
---

The principal built-in types in Python are numerics, sequences, mappings, classes, instances and exceptions. Reference [this] site for a complete description. This post will cover some of the commonly used python built-in types.

---
## Numeric Types
- `int`
- `float`
- `complex`

__Supported Operations__

- `x + y`, `x - y`, `x * y`, `x / y`, `x // y`, `x % y`
- `x| y`, `x ^ y`, `x & y`, `x << n`, `x >> n`, `~x' 
- `abs(x)`, `int(x)`, `float(x)`
- `complex(re,im)`, `c.conjugate()`
- `divmod(x, y)`, `pow(x, y)`, `x ** y`
- `math.trunc(x)`, `round(x[, n])`, `math.floor(x)`, `math.ceil(x)`

---
## Sequence Types
- `list`
  - Using a pair of square brackets to denote the empty list: `[]`
  - Using square brackets, separating items with commas: `[a]`, `[a, b, c]`
  - Using a list comprehension: `[x for x in iterable]`
  - Using the type constructor: `list()` or `list(iterable)`
  - **Mutable** 
- `tuple`
  - Using a pair of parentheses to denote the empty tuple: `()`
  - Using a trailing comma for a singleton tuple: `a,` or `(a,)`
  - Separating items with commas: `a, b, c` or `(a, b, c)`
  - Using the tuple() built-in: `tuple()` or `tuple(iterable)`
  - **Immutable** 
- `range`
  - `range(stop)`
  - `range(start, stop[, step])`
  - **Immutable** 
- `str`
  - Single quotes: `'allows embedded "double" quotes'`
  - Double quotes: `"allows embedded 'single' quotes"`
  - Triple quoted: `'''Three single quotes''', """Three double quotes"""`
  - **Immutable**
 
 __Common Operations__
 
 - `x in s`, `x not in s`
 - `s + t`, `s * n`
 - `s[i]`, `s[i:j]`, `s[i:j:k]`
 - `len(s)`, `min(s)`, `max(s)`
 - `s.index(x[, i[, j]])`, `s.count(x)`

__Mutable Sequence Operations__

- `s[i] = x`, `s[i:j] = t`, `s[i:j:k] = t`
- `del s[i]`, `del s[i:j]`, `del s[i:j:k]`, `s.clear()`/`del s[:]`
- `s.append(x)`, `s.pop()`/`s.pop(i)`, `s.remove(x)`
- `s.copy()`/`s[:]`, `s.reverse()`
- `s.extend(t)`/`s += t`, `s *= n`, `s.insert(i, x)`

---
## Mapping Types
- `dict`
  - Use a comma-separated list of `key: value` pairs within braces: `{'jack': 4098, 'sjoerd': 4127}`
  - Use a dict comprehension: `{}`, `{x: x ** 2 for x in range(10)}`
  - Use the type constructor: `dict()`, `dict([('foo', 100), ('bar', 200)])`, `dict(foo=100, bar=200)`
  - **Mutable**
    - Use `keys` to change a `dict` instead of `index` like that in a `list`

__Dict Operations__

- `list(d)`, `len(d)`, `d[key]`
- `d[key] = value`, `del d[key]`, `clear()`
- `key in d`, `key not in d`
- `get(key[, default])`
- `d.copy()`, `reversed(d)`
- `d.pop(key[, default])`, `d.popitem()`

---
## Set Types
- `set`
  - Use a comma-separated list of elements within braces: `{'jack', 'sjoerd'}`
  - Use a set comprehension: `{c for c in 'abracadabra' if c not in 'abc'}`
  - Use the type constructor: `set(), set('foobar'), set(['a', 'b', 'foo'])`
  - **Immutable** (except `add()` and `remove()`)

---
## Binary Types
- `bytes`
  - Single quotes: `b'still allows embedded "double" quotes'`
  - Double quotes: `b"still allows embedded 'single' quotes"`
  - Triple quoted: `b'''3 single quotes'''`, `b"""3 double quotes"""`
  - **Immutable**
- `bytearray`
  - Creating an empty instance: `bytearray()`
  - Creating a zero-filled instance with a given length: `bytearray(10)`
  - From an iterable of integers: `bytearray(range(20))`
  - Copying existing binary data via the buffer protocol: `bytearray(b'Hi!')`
  - **Mutable**

---
## Iterator Types
Python supports a concept of iteration over containers. This is implemented using two distinct methods; these are used to allow user-defined classes to support iteration.

`Lists`, `tuples`, `dictionaries`, `str` and `sets` are all iterable objects.

__Dict Operations__

- `iterator = iter(iterableObj)`
- `next(iterator)`

```python
animals = {'dog', 'cat', 'pig', 'goat'}
iterator = iter(animals)

next(iterator)
Out[104]: 'cat'

next(iterator)
Out[105]: 'goat'

next(iterator)
Out[106]: 'pig'

next(iterator)
Out[107]: 'dog'
```

To create an object/class as an iterator we have to implement the methods __iter__() and __next__() to the object.

`iterator.__iter__()`: Return the iterator object itself. This is required to allow both containers and iterators to be used with the `for` and `in` statements. 

`iterator.__next__()`: Return the next item from the iterator. If there are no further items, raise the `StopIteration` exception.

---
